Request for Comments (#23)
cabal-club/cable: wire.md

    - [6.3.3 Responses](#633-responses)
      * [6.3.3.1 Hash Response](#6331-hash-response)
      * [6.3.3.2 Post Response](#6332-post-response)
      * [6.3.3.3 Channel List Response](#6333-channel-list-response)
* [7. Security Considerations](#7-security-considerations)
  + [7.1 Out of scope Threats](#71-out-of-scope-threats)
  + [7.2 In-scope Threats](#72-in-scope-threats)
  + [7.2.1 Susceptibilities](#721-susceptibilities)
    - [7.2.1.1 Inappropriate Use](#7211-inappropriate-use)
    - [7.2.1.2 Spoofing](#7212-spoofing)
    - [7.2.1.3 Denial of Service](#7213-denial-of-service)
    - [7.2.1.4 Repudiation](#7214-repudiation)
    - [7.2.1.5 Message Omission](#7215-message-omission)
    - [7.2.1.6 Attacker Expulsion](#7216-attacker-expulsion)
  + [7.2.2 Protections](#722-protections)
    - [7.2.2.1 Replay Attacks](#7221-replay-attacks)
    - [7.2.2.2 Data Integrity](#7222-data-integrity)
    - [7.2.2.3 Privilege Escalation](#7223-privilege-escalation)
  + [7.3 Future Work](#73-future-work)
* [8. Normative References](#8-normative-references)
* [9. Informative References](#9-informative-references)

## 0. Background

> [Cabal][Cabal] is existing distributed peer-to-peer computer software for

Reviewer: Found the opening of the sentence ("is existing ... software") surprisingly difficult to parse ("is *an* existing..."?, "is ~~existing~~ distributed..."?)

private group chats. It operates in a fashion different from the typical

> server-client model, where no machine is either an official nor de facto

Reviewer: The "where" leads me think the following fragment will describe the client-server model.

is "either - nor" a valid construction?

Will tone down the stylistic nitpicking later, but the first paragraph is important enough that I'm doing it there.

Author: I rewrote this, using my revisions to `README.md` as a base.

cable is designed to be:

* fairly simple to implement in any language with minimal dependencies
* general enough to be used across different network transports
* useful, even if written as a partial implementation
* efficient in its use of network resources, by
    * syncing only the relevant subsets of the full dataset, and
    * being compact over the wire
* not specific to any particular kind of database backend

### 1.1 Terminology
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in [BCP 14][BCP 14], [RFC 2119][RFC 2119], [RFC
8174][RFC 8174] when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown
here.

## 2. Scope
This protocol focuses on the over-the-wire bytes that get sent between peers
that enable the exchange of chat messages and user and channel information.

This protocol does not specify encryption nor authentication of the connection,
nor a mechanism for the discovery of network peers. These may be provided by
other layers in userland (e.g. [Tor][Tor], [I2P][I2P]) or specified in future

> cable work.

Reviewer: No reference to the handshake spec here?

Reviewer 2: This surprised me, too. Isn't the handshake spec exactly that?

Author: Good catch! I wrote this document first, before the handshake protocol existed. :)

It is assumed that peers speaking cable are already authorized to access its
data. Section [Security Considerations](#7-security-considerations) includes an
analysis of the types of anticipated attacks that authorized members may still
carry out.

## 3. Definitions
**client**: A running instance of a computer program that implements cable.

**cabal**: An instance of a private group chat, whose client participants speak the cable protocol.

> **peer**: A client, to whom the referred to client is connected to over some transport protocol.

Reviewer: The handshake spec called this a "host" (at least once). Deliberate distinction or inconsistent terminology?

Author: I wrestled with this, but I would say different concepts. I realized that "client" defined here is the same as "host", and have pushed a correction. I also tried to clarify the difference between host and peer.

> **Ed25519**: A public-key cryptographic signature system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Ed25519**: A particular public-key cryptographic signature system.
```

Also add link?

Author: Link added. Also, I'm not clear: what distinction does the word "particular" make here?

Reviewer: Technically you would be defining **Ed25519** to be your short-hand terminology for "public-key cryptographic signature system". (Yes, this is needlessly pedantic, and you should probably ignore me on this.)

Author: I went off of the [Ed25519](https://ed25519.cr.yp.to/) website, which says

> Ed25519 is a public-key signature system

**hash**: A 32-byte BLAKE2b digest of a particular sequence of bytes.

**public key**: An Ed25519 key that can be known by others.

**private key**: An Ed25519 key, used for signing data. Kept secret to all but whoever controls it.

**signature**: A unique sequence of binary data that can be produced by combining a private key and an input text. The signature can then be verified by the private key's corresponding public key.

**user**: A pair of Ed25519 keys -- a public key and private key -- identifying a distinct person or program in a cabal. A user is known by others by their public key.

**post**: A binary payload of a specific format, signed with the private key of the user who created it.

**link**: A hash appearing in a post, which acts as a reference to another post.

**channel**: A conceptual object with its own unique name, that users can participate in by authoring posts that reference the channel.

**request**: A binary payload originating from a particular client.

**response**: A binary payload, traversing the network from a particular client back to the client who issued the original request.

> **`req_id`**: A unique 32-bit number that uniquely identifies a request traversing in the network, and any corresponding responses.

Reviewer: This is the only defined term using code styling.

Duplicate "unique", also there is a (perceived) contradiction between uniqueness and then the fact that it identifies more than a single message.

Author: Fixed the duplicate "unique" -- thanks! You are technically correct that it refers to multiple messages: I'm thinking you're referring to the fact that since a peer forwarding a message would decrement its TTL, it's technically not the same message? I'll rephrase to say it identifies a "particular request".

**requester**: A client authoring a request, to be sent to other peers.

**responder**: A client authoring a response, in reference to a request sent to them.

> **message**: Either a request or a response.

Reviewer: move up directly below the definitions of request and response?

**UNIX epoch**: Midnight UTC on January 1st, 1970.

**timestamp**: A point in time represented by the number of milliseconds since the UNIX epoch.

> **head**: When used to refer to a post, any post that no other known post links to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**head**: When used to refer to posts, any post that no other known post links to.
```

?
Genuinely unsure what this intends to define.

Author: Tried to redefine this for clarity.

> **latest**: When used to refer to a post, the latest post is that post which, from a client's perspective at a given moment in time, is the head with the greatest timestamp.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**latest**: When used to refer to a post, the **latest** post is that post which, from a client's perspective at a given moment in time, is the head with the greatest timestamp.
```

No other definition restates the term to be defined in the explanation. Found this confusing to parse.

The definition implies there is only a singular head ("is *the* head with the greatest timestamp"), whereas the definition of *head* seems to indicate there can be several?

Author: I appreciate this note, thank you. I've updated the definitions; curious if it helps.

> **varint**: a variable-length unsigned integer, encoded as [Unsigned LEB128](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LEB128#Unsigned_LEB128).

Reviewer: I passionately hate this varint encoding. You can't tell the length of the int by looking at the first byte, instead a parser has to look (and branch) for every individual byte. Comparing the encodings of two ints lexicographically does not give you the relation between the two ints, you have to decode for that (probably irrelevant for cable though).

To quote a maintainer of the ipfs multiformats https://github.com/multiformats/unsigned-varint/issues/12#issuecomment-580370217:

> At this point, the ship has sailed, landed, been retired, and turned into a national monument. I agree this varint encoding is hardly perfect and we should look into alternative formats for future protocols/projects, but it's just not feasible to switch at this point.

I humbly (or, well, not humbly) submit https://github.com/AljoschaMeyer/varu64 as an alternative.

LEB is one of these lets-pick-the-first-solution-we-came-up-with designs, even though there exist much more efficient alternatives. Yet people keep on using it.

End of rant.

Reviewer 3: IMO varint could be good to have still since there's likely a lot of implementations out there in different languages and it's relatively well known. Are there alternatives that are about as widespread?

Author: Oof, that's a toughie. I like how simple varu64 is, but it also seems that it grows in bytes a bit faster than LEB128 after `247`. Do you have any benchmarks? I'll think some more on this.

Author: I thought some more about it, and I think LEB128 is ok for our use case: most varints we use are < 128 (including chat msg lengths from the current public cabal), and 2024 timestamps are 6 bytes under both LEB128 and varu64.

The other factors for me were not having access to benchmarks, and the limited usage in production code (p2panda).

**Unicode**: The [Unicode 15.0.0 standard](https://www.unicode.org/versions/Unicode15.0.0/).

**UTF-8**: The "UTF-8" encoding scheme outlined in [Chapter 2 Section 5](https://www.unicode.org/versions/Unicode15.0.0/ch02.pdf#G11165) of the Unicode 15.0.0 specification.

## 4. Cryptographic Parameters

### 4.1 BLAKE2b
The following are the general parameters to be used with BLAKE2b.

- Digest byte length: 32
- Key byte length (not used): 0
- Salt (hexadecimal): `5b6b 41ed 9b34 3fe0`

> - Personalization (hexadecimal): `5126 fb2a 3740 0d2a`

Reviewer 2: May I ask where these parameters came from? :)

Author: The libsodium implementation of BLAKE2b.

- ℓ = 2<sup>252</sup> + 27742317777372353535851937790883648493
- *d* = -121655 / 121666 ∈ **F**<sub>q</sub>
- *B* is the unique point (*x*,4/5) ∈ *E* for which *x* is positive

## 5. Data Model

### 5.1 Posts
All of the durable data exchanged over the protocol are composed of posts.

A post MUST have an author (via the required `public_key` field), and MUST
provide a cryptographic signature (via the required `signature` field) to prove
that they, in fact, authored it.

When a user "makes a post", they are only writing to some local storage,
perhaps indexed by the hash of the content for easy querying. Posts are only
sent to other peers in response to queries about them (e.g. chat messages
within some time range).

| `post_type` numeric id | common name  | description |
|------------------------|--------------|-------------|
| 0                      | `post/text`  | a textual chat message, posted to a channel |
| 1                      | `post/delete`| the deletion of a previously published post |
| 2                      | `post/info`  | set or clear informative key/value pairs on a user  |
| 3                      | `post/topic` | set or clear a channel's topic string |

> | 4                      | `post/join`  | announce membership to a channel |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 4                      | `post/join`  | announce membership in a channel |
```
?

Author: I was curious, and my research suggests that "to" is also a valid preposition to use here!
- https://english.stackexchange.com/questions/480235/is-membership-to-an-organisation-wrong

> | 5                      | `post/leave` | announce cessation of membership to a channel |

Reviewer: Ah, you are not talking *about* a channel but *to* a channel. Hmm, maybe there's a better formulation somewhere.

#### 5.1.2 Addressing
Any post in cable can be addressed or referenced by its hash.

The hash for a post is produced by putting a post's verbatim binary content,

> including the post header, through the BLAKE2b function.

Reviewer: Maybe state that there will be a proper definition later?

Is there a proper definition later?

At this point in my first read-through, I *hope* there is a proper definition later.

Author: I added a note. Thanks!

#### 5.1.3 Links

> The `links` field in each post's header enables any post to refer to 0 or more

Reviewer: Post headers have fields? Posts have headers?

Author: Yes?

I think I find comments written in this style challenging to parse. My best guesses are that you are expressing surprise that either a) post headers (and their fields) haven't been mentioned before now, or that b) headers can have fields.

Author: I think it's (a) and I pushed a change to reflect that. :)

other posts by means of specifying those posts' hashes.

Referencing a post by its hash provides a **causal proof**: it demonstrates
that a post must have occurred after all of the other posts referenced. This
property can be useful for ordering chat messages, since a timestamp alone can
cause ordering problems if a client's hardware clock is skewed, or a timestamp
is spoofed.

> Implementations are RECOMMENDED to set and utilize links on chat messages

Reviewer: What does "utilize" encompass?

Author: I'm so glad you asked! This section was very under-specified. I've rewritten it, and am curious what you think.

> Implementations are RECOMMENDED to set and utilize links on chat messages

Reviewer 3: Mind elaborating on why it's recommended instead of mandatory?

Author: The idea with recommended implementation is because it adds to the load of work implementors would need to do, which is an accessibility concern, making it possible for more minimal implementations to exist.

specifically (`post/text`). Clients that do not support setting links will

> reduce the quality of the cabal's data's eventual consistency. The fewer

Reviewer: A system is either eventually consistent, or it is not. "Something something happened-before relation something something partial order" might be better (or at the very least, more precise)?

Author: Agreed. Removed this bit.

> clients that are participating in a cabal that do not set links, the more

Reviewer: Botched double negation? The **more* clients don't set links, the coarser the happened-before relation.

Author: Good catch!

vulnerable to clock skew or maliciously inaccurate timestamps its participants
will be.

##### 5.1.3.1 Setting links

> In order to set links on a post, each channel's current heads MUST be tracked.

Reviewer: I personally tend to avoid MUSTs in p2p specs where peers cannot detect whether another peer followed the MUST or not. Undetectable behavior feels more like a SHOULD to me. But that is just personal preference.

A detectable MUST here could force peers to never point to a post if it has already pointed to a newer post before (provably before, and maybe also claimed-timestamp-before). But do you want other peers to check for this? How should they deal with violations?

Dealing with violations in a p2p setting is why I'm careful with MUSTs that aren't strictly necessary or not necessarily undetectable.

Author: I appreciate this comment & agree with it. This section now uses SHOULD language.

If a client is setting links on new posts, it MUST set the `links` field to the
hashes of all known heads in the channel being posted in. Doing so will converge

> the number of heads in a channel down to 1 (the post being made).

Reviewer: This convergence is purely locally, not globally, right? Might be nice to point this out (the whole section might perhaps benefit from a this-is-about-the-local-view-of-a-single-client disclaimer).

Author: Right! Everything in this specification is from the view of a given host; there is no "global view" as I understand it.

### 5.2 Requests & Responses
All request types MAY yield multiple responses from peers. A request sent to a

> peer may result in several blocks of hashes or data being sent back by them as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
peer may result in several blocks of hashes or data being sent back by the responder as
```

> they scan their local database. Additionally, if that peer forwards a request

Reviewer: ```suggestion
they scan their local database. Additionally, if the responder forwards a request
```

to its own set of peers, they too may trickle back several responses over time.

> 

Reviewer: Presenting the following table of msg types without an introduction and without the next section referring to one of its rows feels unnatural to me.

Author: I agree! I've addressed both.

| `msg_type` numeric id | common name                   | description |
|-----------------------|-------------------------------|-------------|

> | 2                     | Post Request                  | request the posts that hash to particular set of hashes |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 2                     | Post Request                  | request the posts that hash to one out of a particular set of hashes |
```

| 4                     | Channel Time Range Request    | request hashes of chat messages and deletions within a time range |
| 5                     | Channel State Request         | request hashes describing a given channel's state |
| 6                     | Channel List Request          | request a list of all known channel names |
| 0                     | Hash Response                 | a list of hashes, pertaining to some request |
| 1                     | Post Response                 | a list of posts, pertaining to some request |
| 7                     | Channel List Response         | a list of channel names |

#### 5.2.1 Time To Live
The TTL mechanism exists to allow clients with limited connectivity to peers
(e.g. behind a strong NAT or a restricted mobile connection) to use the peers
they can reach as a relay to find and retrieve data they are interested in more
easily.

The `ttl` field, set in the request header, expresses an upper bound on how
many times a request is forwarded to other peers. A client wishing a request
not be forwarded beyond its initial destination peer MUST set `ttl = 0`.

An incoming request with `ttl = 0` MUST NOT be forwarded.

> An incoming request with a `ttl > 0` SHOULD be forwarded along to all peers the

Reviewer: Except the peer who sent the request?

Author: I've tried to clarify these sections.

client is connected to. A peer forwarding a request MUST decrement the `ttl` by
one before sending it, to ensure the number of network hops does not exceed
what the original requester specified.

To prevent request loops in the network, an incoming request with a known

> `req_id` MUST be discarded.

Reviewer: What makes a `req_id` "known"? Is every peer obligated to track all known ids with 100% accuracy?

Author: I've tried to clarify these sections to answer that Q. :)

2. An **intermediary peer**: any client who received the request from
   one or more peers and has also forwarded it to others. An intermediary peer
   has both a set of *inbound peers* for a request as well as a set of *outbound peers*.

3. A **terminal peer**: a client who received the request from one or
   more peers and does NOT forward it to any others. A terminal peer has only
   a set of *inbound peers*.

A peer handling a request who has *outbound peers* (original requester,
intermediary peer) MUST satisfy any of the following in order to consider a
request concluded, for each outbound peer:

1. Receives a "no more data" Hash Response (`hash_count = 0`) from the peer.
2. Sends the peer a Cancel Request, induced by an explicit client action or,
   for example, a local timeout a client set on the request.
3. The connection to the peer is lost.

A peer handling a request who has *inbound peers* (intermediary peer, terminal
peer) MUST satisfy any of the following in order to consider a request
concluded, for each inbound peer:

1. Sends a "no more data" response back to the peer.
2. Receives a Cancel Request.
3. The connection to the peer is lost.

> 

Reviewer: "consider concluded" means "is not *known*" anymore? Needs explicit specification (and could maybe be done by using only one of "known" and "concluded").

Reviewer 2: That is how I would understand it, and I agree the wording should be more precise here. Maybe also foreshadow the life cycle of a request in the TTL section, so it's clear what "known" means?

Author: Agreed! I've moved Message Lifetimes to go first and clarified that `req_id` is tracked based on messages that a host knows of that are not yet concluded, so then TTL definitions then follow and use that information.

#### 5.2.3 Limits
Some requests have a `limit` field specifying an upper bound on how many hashes
a client wishes to receive in response. A peer responding to such a request
MUST honour that limit by counting how many hashes they send back to the
requester, including hashes received through other peers that the responding
client has forwarded that request to.

> 

Reviewer: At this point in reading, I need to know what happens after forwarding a request. Will the recipients connect to the original requester, or will they route through me? Am I expected to forward their responses? The spec did not say any of this explicitly (unless I skimmed past that or forgot about it already =S).

Author: Agreed; this is underspecified. I've pushed a revision of these sections!

first, which means there are now a maximum of `50 - 15 = 35` hashes left for `C`
and `D` combined for `B` to potentially send back.

A requester receiving more than `limit` hashes MAY choose to discard the
extraneous ones.

#### 5.2.4 Deduplication
A client who is also an intermediary peer MAY elect to perform deduplication on
the behalf of a requester, in order to reduce redundant retransmission of post
or hash data (Post Response and Hash Response, respectively).

For example, consider a client `A` which sends a request to `B` with `ttl = 1`.
`B` then forwards that request to their peers `C` and `D`. If `B` responds to `A`
with a set of N hashes or posts `B` could track what they sent. Additionally, in the
case that `C` or `D`'s responses -- routed through `B` -- contain any
duplicates that `B` knows were already sent back to `A`, `B` could choose to
edit these response messages, to omit the duplicates from being needlessly
retransmitted onwards back to `A`.

Regarding the above section (5.2.3 Limits), hashes that are deduplicated by an
intermediary peer, and thus not transmitted back to the requester, do not count

> against the `limit`.

Reviewer: More interestingly, if `B` does *not* deduplicate, then MUST they count a message they forwarded twice twice against the limit? Is it possible for a peer to set a limit of 100 and receive the same message 100 times? If so, is there always a way for them to slightly change their request when they send it again so that that highly duplicated message is excluded and other messages can make it through?

Reviewer 2: From the wording I would assume that is the case. They can request the posts/hashes of a time range that does not contain the message they just received 100 times.

Author: @AljoschaMeyer Yes, the duplicates count if not deduplicated:

> A peer responding to such a request MUST honour that limit by counting how many hashes they send back to the requester, including hashes received through other peers that the responding host has forwarded that request to.

It would certainly be preferable for intermediary peers to NOT choose to filter out everything *except* the duplicates though. :)

This feels desirable enough though, and not a ton of extra memory cost, that I will upgrade the MAY to a SHOULD (so low-memory devices can still opt-out).

An intermediary peer MAY also elect to perform deduplication in the other
direction on Post Requests, by first checking their local database to see which

> hashes they already have posts for, and editing the original Post Request

Reviewer 3: How do they edit the request if it's signed? Or is any peer able to edit any request in transit?

Author: - Posts: signed, immutable structures
- Messages (requests & responses): unsigned, transport structures

Sorry, I tried to make it clear in the definitions section that only posts are signed, and the difference between posts and messages. Open to suggestions on making that clearer!

message to no longer request those posts, before forwarding that message on to
further peers.

### 5.3 Users

#### 5.3.1 Names
- A valid user name MUST be a UTF-8 string.
- A valid user name MUST between 1 and 32 codepoints.

#### 5.3.2 State

> A user is described by the following:

Reviewer: This contradicts the definition of "user" in section 3.

Author: Aah, good catch. "A user has the following properties:"  :)

1. their public key
2. the key/value pairs of the latest known `post/info` post made by that user.

As of present, the only supported key is `name`, which defines a user's display

> name.

Reviewer: What does "supported" mean? MAY I send info for unsupported key/value pairs? How SHOULD my peers react to them?

Author: Great questions. I've removed some of the wording so it's less prohibitive here, and expanded the text under the `post/info` section to clarify that it's fine to use other keys.

> `post/info` posts older than the latest for a user are considered obsolete.

Reviewer: "older" by timestamp or causal history? What if those contradict each other?

What does "consider obsolete" mean, and *who* considers them obsolete?

Author: I rewrote this section to be clearer, and overhauled the definitions section to be much more explicit about "latest" and sorting.

### 5.4 Channels
A channel is a named collection consisting of the following:

1. chat messages (`post/text`)
2. user joins and leaves (`post/join` or `post/leave`).
3. a topic string (`post/topic`)

A user writing a chat message or join to a channel implies that that named

> channel has now been created, if it hasn't already, and thus MUST be returned

Reviewer: ```suggestion
channel has now been created, if it hasn't already been, and thus MUST be returned
```

> in Channel List Requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in future Channel List Requests.
```

#### 5.4.1 Names
- A valid channel name MUST be a UTF-8 string.

> - A valid channel name MUST between 1 and 64 codepoints.

Reviewer: Just in general: Implementation would become easier if the limit was given in terms of utf-8 encoding length. Any particular reason why you specify codepoints instead?

Author: I was thinking about language privilege. Speakers of Latin-derived languages get a big advantage in UTF-8 when it comes to how many characters they can encode, given a fixed byte length. One can encode 64 English letters in 64 bytes, but only e.g. 21 hiragana or sanskrit characters.

An argument could be made that *some* of the higher byte-count languages can encode more complex ideas in those bytes, but that doesn't seem to be true across the board.

#### 5.4.2 Topics
- A valid channel topic MUST be a UTF-8 string.
- A valid channel topic MUST be between 0 and 512 codepoints.
- If there is no known topic set for a channel, it MUST be considered the empty string (`""`).

> - A channel topic string set by a user to the empty string MUST be considered as there being no topic currently set.

Reviewer: Is this a semantic criterion or a syntactic one (the previous three were all syntactic, so this one stands out).

Author: Semantic, yes.

#### 5.4.3 User Membership

> A user makes a post "to a channel" if they have set the `channel` field on said

Reviewer: Posts have fields?

Author: They do!

Reviewer: But as a reader, I don't know that yet at this point of the spec.

Author: Ah, great point. I've updated the definition of post.

post to the name of that channel.

> A user is a member of a channel at a particular point in time if, from a

Reviewer: Which time? Local causal time? Claimed timestamp? Mythical global time?

Author: Any time. Would "at a particular instant" be clearer?

client's perspective, that user has issued a `post/join`, `post/text`, or
`post/topic` to that channel and has not issued a `post/leave` since.

If a user's latest known post to a channel is a `post/leave`, they are not a
member of that channel.

> 

Reviewer: What if their second-to-latest post is `post/leave`, and their latest post is `post/text`? I.e., any non-happy case?

Author: Then they are a member, as per the preceding paragraph:

> A user is a member of a channel at a particular point in time if, from a host's perspective, that user has issued a `post/join`, `post/text`, or `post/topic` to that channel and has not issued a `post/leave` since.

Author: I've revised this to more simply state, "Otherwise, they are not considered a member."

A user is an ex-member of a channel at a particular point in time if, from a
client's perspective, that user has issued no further posts interacting with a
channel since a `post/leave` post was issued.

Clients SHOULD issue a `post/join` post before issuing any other posts to a
channel.

#### 5.4.4 State
A channel at any given moment, from the perspective of a client, is fully
described by the following:

> 1. The latest `post/info` post of all members and ex-members.

Reviewer: This makes it sound like they are channel-specific, whereas I thought they were cabal-wide.

Author: What is "they" here? `post/info` posts? Can you say more about why they seem channel-specific? They are indeed cabal-wide.

client to track the state of a channel that a client is interested in. The
former request allows tracking general state (who is in the channel, its topic,
information about users in the channel), and the latter tracks the history of
chat messages within that channel.

Clients SHOULD set the `time_end` and `time_start` fields of Channel Time Range
Requests in the following manner, to reliably track channel chat history:

```
time_end = now()
time_start = now() - WINDOW_WIDTH
```

where `now()` is the current system UNIX Time, and `WINDOW_WIDTH` is the size
of the "rolling window" to track chat messages within, in milliseconds. Clients are
RECOMMENDED to use a `WINDOW_WIDTH` of one week (25,200,000 milliseconds), though this
value MAY be customized, since there are network environments where users may
be offline for up to several months at a time, and a much wider rolling window
would be necessary to ensure those chat messages are synchronized when such a
user connects once again to other peers in the cabal.

Other `time_start`/`time_end` values are potentially useful, such as querying
farther back in time to acquire a more complete set of chat message history.

> 

Reviewer: This is only for syncing, but not concerned with forgetting about older data, right?

If you never request data older than a `WINDOW_WIDTH`, then technically (and practically) the system is not eventually consistent. So you might want to remove that terminology elsewhere.

Author: Yes; agreed.

also defines the exact byte order required to produce a particular type of
payload, where the first field describes the first set of bytes and so on.
Taken together, field tables describe how to produce and decode binary payloads
from and into the different post and message types described in subsequent
sections.

field      | type     | desc
-----------|----------|-------------------------------------------------------------
`foo`      | `u8`     | description of the field `foo`
`bar`      | `u8[4]`  | description of the field `bar`

The above example describes a 5 byte binary payload. The payload's first byte
is defined to be `foo`. The 1 byte `foo` is followed immediately by `bar`,
which is defined to be 4 bytes long.

If `foo = 17` and `bar = [3,6,8,64]`, the binary payload would be as follows:

```
 foo   bar
 0x11  0x03 0x06 0x08 0x40
 ^^^^  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
 |     ╰-------------------- bar = [3, 6, 8, 64]
 |
 ╰-------------------------- foo = 17
```

The following data types are used:
- `u8`: a single unsigned byte.
- `u8[N]`: a sequence of exactly `N` unsigned bytes.
- `varint`: a variable-length unsigned integer. 

### 6.2 Post Formats

> 

Reviewer: *Insert generic rant of mine about defining data types through their encodings, or at least at the same time as their encodings.*

The spec up to this point happily referenced details of posts and other entities, despite only defining them here. That makes linear reading difficult (and only works if I, the reader, trust you, the spec author, to know what you are doing. Which I myself do, but not every reader might).

Reviewer 2: I also found this pretty confusing.

Author: I agree: I'm not happy with this state of affairs either. I think I'll play with moving it up once more comments are addressed, so it's not a giant diff that messes up existing comments. Thanks for naming this.

Author: > Insert generic rant of mine about defining data types through their encodings, or at least at the same time as their encodings.

Could you say more about this?

#### 6.2.1 Header
Every post MUST begin with the following 6-field header:

field        | type              | desc
-------------|-------------------|-------------------------------------------------------
`public_key` | `u8[32]`          | public key that authored this post

> `signature`  | `u8[64]`          | signature of the fields that follow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`signature`  | `u8[64]`          | signature over the fields that follow
```
?

(btw, thank you for not signing the public key =D)

Author: Ha ha, you're welcome, but I admit it wasn't intentional. Is there a security weakness in doing so?

Re: the grammar suggestion, to me, these both mean the same thing. Is use of "over" have a more precise cryptographic interpretation vs. "of"?

Reviewer: > Is there a security weakness in doing so?

No, it's just pointless.

Grammar: Feel free to ignore that one, that's just personal preference of mine I guess.

`num_links`  | `varint`          | how many hashes this post links back to (0+)
`links`      | `u8[32*num_links]`| hashes of the latest posts in this channel/context
`post_type`  | `varint`          | see custom post type sections below
`timestamp`  | `varint`          | milliseconds since UNIX Epoch

> The `signature` for a post is produced by signing all fields of the post

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `signature` for a post is produced by signing the concatenation of all fields of the post
```

Author: Beautiful 👩🏻‍🍳 😘 👌🏻

immediately after the `signature` field, including the `post_type`-specific
fields specified in the sections that follow, using the Ed25519 signature
scheme.

The post type sections below document the fields that MUST follow these initial
fields, depending on the `post_type`.

The protocol MAY be extended by implementers by creating additional
`post_type`s. Implementers MUST only use `post_type > 255`. The
first 256 are reserved for core protocol use.

> `num_links` MUST be set to 0 if there are no posts to link to.

Reviewer: Isn't this redundant?

Author: Agreed. Removing.

Clients SHOULD discard posts with a `post_type` that they don't understand or

> support.

Reviewer: Huh, interesting. You actively recommend against altruistically storing them for forwarding to others who might know about them?

Reviewer 2: At what stage of processing should they be discarded? Should they also be discarded when I only forward requests and responses from someone else?

Author: I'm not sure why I wrote that. Looking at it with fresh eyes, I don't agree with it. Holding on to such posts could be useful in cases where, say, several peers have upgraded to a new protocol version with new post types, and the current host may upgrade themselves soon. I'm removing this clause.

`channel_len`  | `varint`           | length of the channel's name, in bytes
`channel`      | `u8[channel_len] ` | channel name (UTF-8)
`text_len`     | `varint`           | length of the text field, in bytes
`text`         | `u8[text_len] `    | chat message text (UTF-8)

`post_type` MUST be set to `0`.

The `text` body of a chat message MUST be a valid UTF-8 string. Its length MUST
NOT exceed 4 kibibytes (4096 bytes).

#### 6.2.3 `post/delete`

Request that peers encountering this post delete the referenced posts from
their local storage, and not store the referenced posts in the future.

field           | type                   | desc
----------------|------------------------|-------------------------
`num_deletions` | `varint`               | how many hashes of posts there are to be deleted
`hashes`        | `u8[32*num_deletions]` | concatenated hashes of posts to be deleted

`post_type` MUST be set to `1`.

A client interpreting this post MUST only perform a local deletion of the
referenced posts if the author (`post.public_key`) matches the author of the
post to be deleted (i.e. only the user who authored a post may delete it).

> `num_deletions` MUST be set to 1 or greater.

Reviewer: What are peers supposed to do when they receive a message violating this MUST? If nothing, then why is it a MUST? Or specified in the first place?

Author: Honestly, I agree, it's not necessary. It seems simpler to permit `num_deletions=0` and be more permissive in what is accepted.

#### 6.2.4 `post/info`

Set public information about one's self.

field        | type               | desc
-------------|--------------------|-------------------------
`key1_len`   | `varint`           | length of the first key to set, in bytes
`key1`       | `u8[key1_len]`     | name of the first key to set (UTF-8)
`value1_len` | `varint`           | length of the first value to set, belonging to `key1`, in bytes
`value1`     | `u8[value_len]`    | value of the first key:value pair
...          |                    |
`keyN_len`   | `varint`           | length of the Nth key to set, in bytes
`keyN`       | `u8[keyN_len]`     | name of the Nth key to set (UTF-8)
`valueN_len` | `varint`           | length of the Nth value to set, belonging to `keyN`, in bytes
`valueN`     | `u8[value_len]`    | value of the Nth key:value pair

`post_type` MUST be set to `2`.

Several key/value pairs MAY be set at once. A post MUST indicate it is done

> specifying pairs by setting the final `keyN_len` to 0.

Reviewer: So keys cannot be the empty string?

Why not simply the number of pairs as a varint first, instead?

Author: Wonderful catch. I could see that causing problems down the line. I've adopted this suggestion entirely. 💜

A `post/info` post is a complete description of a user's self-published
information. A `post/info` post fully replaces a previously known version, and
are not additive. If a key is set in one `post/info` but not the subsequent
one, that key MUST be treated as being set to its default. See the table of
keys/values below for each key's default value.

> Keys MUST be UTF-8 strings, and MUST be between 1 and 128 codepoints in length.

Reviewer: Ah, I see.

Author: I still think the ability to explicitly set something to the empty string is useful, especially if the default is something other than the empty string.

A value field MUST NOT exceed 4096 bytes (4 kibibytes) in length.

The valid bytes for a value depends on the key. See the table below.

The following keys SHOULD be supported:

key       | value format | desc
----------|--------------|---------------------------------------
`name`    | UTF-8        | the name this user wishes to be known as. Default value is "" (empty string).

To save space, a client MAY discard older versions of these messages for a

> particular user.

Reviewer: This makes it sound like there are other cases where clients are forbidden to get rid of some data. Which feels odd.

Author: Oh interesting. I had actually the opposite intention: to tell implementors that they're under no obligation to hold onto things forever.

As in, I wanted to be clear that "hey once you get a newer value for this, you don't need to stress about keeping this around".

Reviewer: Right. I read it as "for these particular things, you MAY forget them, but everything where we don't give you express permission has to stay". Perhaps something along "Clients MAY discard any data they please." somewhere in a prominent position?

Author: Great idea. This is now live, under "5.1.5 Keeping & Discarding Posts".

#### 6.2.5 `post/topic`

Set a topic for a channel.

field          | type               | desc
---------------|--------------------|-------------------------------------------------------
`channel_len`  | `varint`           | length of the channel's name, in bytes
`channel`      | `u8[channel_len] ` | channel name (UTF-8)
`topic_len`    | `varint`           | length of the topic field, in bytes
`topic`        | `u8[topic_len] `   | topic content (UTF-8)

`post_type` MUST be set to `3`.

A `topic` field MUST be a valid UTF-8 string, between 0 and 512 codepoints. A
topic of length zero MUST be considered as the current topic being cleared to

> the empty string, "".

Reviewer: The info about length zero is redundant.

Author: I think this is me trying to communicate to implementors that they ought interpret the empty string as a cleared key, which means they could display something different for the topic (e.g. "no topic set") instead of just the empty string.

`channel_len`  | `varint`           | length of the channel's name, in bytes
`channel`      | `u8[channel_len] ` | channel name (UTF-8)

`post_type` MUST be set to `4`.

#### 6.2.7 `post/leave`

Publicly announce termination of membership in a channel.

field          | type               | desc
---------------|--------------------|-------------------------------------------------------
`channel_len`  | `varint`           | length of the channel's name, in bytes
`channel`      | `u8[channel_len] ` | channel name (UTF-8)

`post_type` MUST be set to `5`.

### 6.3 Message Formats

#### 6.3.1 Message Header

All messages MUST begin with the following header fields:

field         | type     | desc
--------------|----------|-------------------------------------------------------------
`msg_len`     | `varint` | number of bytes in rest of message, not including the `msg_len` field
`msg_type`    | `varint` | a type identifier for the message, which controls which fields follow this header
`circuit_id`  | `u8[4]`  | id of a circuit for an established path, or `[0,0,0,0]` for no circuit
`req_id`      | `u8[4]`  | unique id of this request (random)

> 

Reviewer: No message signing, so vulnerability to spoofing, e.g. to ddos a peer.

Author: Yes. I added a note under Security Considerations about this.

I'm going to reflect on this a bit more re: adding message signing.

Message-specific fields follow after the `req_id`.

Each request and response type has a unique `msg_type` (see below), which
controls which fields will immediately follow this header.

Clients encountering a `msg_type` they do not know how to parse MUST ignore and
discard it.

> The `circuit_id` field is not currently in use, and MUST be set to all zeros.

Reviewer: Then perhaps the desc in the table should simply say that it always is `[0, 0, 0, 0]` instead of introducing the concept of a circuit id if it never gets defined and/or used (which I'm assuming it won't at this point).

Author: Agreed.

The request ID, `req_id`, is a 32-bit number, generated randomly by the
requester. It is used to uniquely identify the request during its lifetime
across the peers who may handle it. For networks with up to 43 million active
requests within a single cabal, the probability of collision remains below 1%.
(i.e. `(1 - 1 / (2**32)) ** 43_000_000 > 0.99`)

When generating a new `req_id`, a client MUST discard and generate a new one if

> the one generated collides with a known active `req_id`.

Reviewer: Don't you trust the collision probability you just computed? If that probability is low enough, you should not need to perform this quite expensive check (expensive because I MUST track all known active ids [ignore this point if I already MUST track them for other reasons]). If you need to do this check, then the collision probability is too high.

Author: I redid the math, using the birthday problem to calculate the probabilities, and realized that 2**32 is not enough. I've changed `req_id` to be 64-bit instead.

My new math shows that, given 10,000 active hosts sending 1 request/second, there'd only be a 1% chance of collision per year, which I feel a lot better about. Even if there is a collision, then the consequence is that some peers may drop that incoming request, believing it to be one they have already seen.

Thanks for commenting on this!

When a client forwards a request to further peers, the `req_id` MUST NOT be
changed, so that routing loops can be more easily detected by peers in the
network.

The protocol MAY be extended by implementers by creating additional
`msg_type`s. Implementers MUST only use `msg_type > 255`. The
first 256 are reserved for core protocol use.

#### 6.3.2 Requests

##### 6.3.2.1 Header

Every request MUST have its header bytes be proceeded by the following request
header fields:

field      | type       | desc
-----------|------------|-----------------------------------
`ttl`      | `varint`   | number of network hops remaining

> The value of `ttl` MUST be between 0 and 16. 0 means "do not forward this

Reviewer 3: Does using varint here add anything over saying it's one byte?

Author: It doesn't! Good catch.

field        | type                | desc
-------------|---------------------|-------------------------------------
`hash_count` | `varint`            | number of hashes to request
`hashes`     | `u8[32*hash_count]` | hashes, concatenated together

`msg_type` MUST be set to `2`.

Results are provided by one or more Post Response messages.

The responder SHOULD immediately return what data is locally available, rather
than holding on to the request in anticipation of perhaps seeing the requested
hashes in the future.

##### 6.3.2.3 Cancel Request

Conclude a given `req_id` and stop receiving responses for that request.

This request can be used to terminated previously sent, long-lived requests.

field        | type                | desc
-------------|---------------------|-------------------------------------
`cancel_id`  | `u8[4]`             | the `req_id` of the request to be cancelled

Receiving this request indicates that any further responses sent back with a
`req_id` matching the given `cancel_id` will be ignored and discarded.

`msg_type` MUST be set to `3`.

`cancel_id` MUST be set to the `req_id` of the request to be cancelled.

> There MUST NOT be any responses to this request.

Reviewer: How would I respond to it in the first place? How would the receiver of that response detect that I'm responding? I hope they are not required to keep track of all cancellations they ever sent.

Author: Changed this to read, "There is no expected response to this request.", which is what I was trying to communicate.

Like any other request, this request MUST have its own unique `req_id` in order
to function as intended. `cancel_id` is used to set the request identifier to
cancel, not the `req_id`.

A peer receiving a Cancel Request MUST forward it along the same route and
peers it forwarded the original message with `req_id = cancel_id`, to the same
peers as the original request, so that all peers who know of the original
request are notified. This request's `ttl` MUST be ignored, in order to ensure

> all original recipients of the original request are reached.

Reviewer: Huh, interesting choice to add a new code path for ignoring the ttl rather than just trusting the canceller to not mess it up.

Author: Agreed. Removing this.

field          | type               | desc
---------------|--------------------|----------------------------
`channel_len`  | `varint`           | length of the channel's name, in bytes
`channel`      | `u8[channel_len] ` | channel name (UTF-8)
`time_start`   | `varint`           | milliseconds since UNIX Epoch (inclusive)
`time_end`     | `varint`           | milliseconds since UNIX Epoch (exclusive)
`limit`        | `varint`           | maximum number of hashes to return

`msg_type` MUST be set to `4`.

A responder receiving this request MUST respond with 1 or more Hash Response
messages.

`time_start` is the post with the oldest timestamp the requester is interested
in; `time_end` is the newest.

A responder SHOULD include the hashes of all known `post/text` and
`post/delete` posts made to a channel between `time_start` and `time_end`.

A `time_end` of 0 MUST be understood as a request to keep this request alive
even after all known hashes in the range `time_start` to `now()` are provided,
and continue to receive any new chat messages that the responder learns of in
the future, so long as this request is still alive. `time_start` MUST be

> respected regardless of whether `time_end` is 0 or some definite value.

Reviewer: MAY I interpret a `time_end` in the future as a request to keep the request alive until that point?

Author: No. I think this would add unnecessary complexity on the responder's side. A requester can achieve this functionality by using `time_end=0` and a Cancel Request issued in the future.

I revised this section though for better clarity, and remove MUSTs that aren't truly MUSTs.

Responding clients SHOULD respond with all known chat messages within the
requested time range, though they may desire not to in certain circumstances,
particularly if a channel has a very long history and the responding client
lacks sufficient resources at the time to return thousands or hundreds of

> thousands of chat message hashes.

Reviewer: Any recommendation on which messages to transmit then (probably the newest ones?)?

Author: I appreciate this catch. Specifying this makes pagination possible!

>  A responder is RECOMMENDED to send posts in reverse chronological order by post timestamp, so that, if the requester sees that they received a number of hashes equal to their `limit`, they can be assured that they now have all posts newer than the oldest post hash the responder did send, and can make subsequent requests to paginate backwards in time.

information.

See Section 5.4.4 for context on what comprises channel state. Chat messages
MUST NOT be included in responses to this request. Clients MUST be able to
handle the hashes of unexpected types appearing in responses, and MAY choose
for themselves whether to discard them or not.

`future` MUST be set to either `1` or `0`.

If `future = 1`, the responder SHOULD respond with future channel state changes
as they become known to the responder, and the request SHOULD be held open
indefinitely on both the requester and responder side until a Cancel Request is
issued by the requester, or the responder elects to end the request by sending
a Hash Response with `hash_count = 0`.

If `future = 1` and a post that is part of the latest state for a channel is
deleted, the responder MUST immediately send the hash of the next-latest
piece of state of that same type as a Hash Response. For example, if the latest
`post/topic` setting the channel's topic string is deleted by its author with a
`post/delete` post, the hash of the second-latest `post/topic` for that channel
SHOULD be sent.

If `future = 0`, only the latest state posts will be included, and the request
MUST NOT be held open.

> 

Reviewer: Why is future boolean and not simply a `limit` int analogous to that of Channel Time Range Requests?

Author: I don't think a limit would be useful here without a means of paginating through the response set of hashes.

##### 6.3.2.6 Channel List Request

Request a list of known channels from peers.

field          | type               | desc
---------------|--------------------|-----------------------------------
`offset`       | `varint`           | number of channel names to skip (`0` to skip none)
`limit`        | `varint`           | maximum number of channel names to return

`msg_type` MUST be set to `6`.

This request returns zero or more Channel List Response messages.

If `limit` is 0, the responder MUST respond with all known channels (after
skipping the first `offset` entries).

The `offset` field can be combined with the `limit` field to allow clients to

> paginate through the list of all channel names known by a peer.

Reviewer: To paginate, they must be consistently sorted. The spec could require this? It might even require a particular ordering, to make pagination consistent irrespective of the peer.

Author: I mention the stable sort requirement in the Channel List Response message, where it's used. I'll think about whether it makes sense to specify a sort method.

Author: I thought about it, and agree that a sort should be specified.

> The channel names SHOULD be sorted lexicographically in ascending order, so that requesters can effectively sent subsequent requests to paginate through the results.

#### 6.3.3 Responses
Multiple responses MAY be generated for a single request, where results trickle
in from the set of responding peers.

Every response MUST begin with the message header detailed in Section 6.3.1,
followed by bytes specific to the response `msg_type`, detailed in the sections
that follow.

Responses containing an unknown `req_id` SHOULD be ignored.

Responders MUST set a response's `req_id` set to the same `req_id` of the
request they are responding to.

##### 6.3.3.1 Hash Response

Respond with a list of zero or more hashes.

field        | type                | desc
-------------|---------------------|-------------------------------------
`hash_count` | `varint`            | number of hashes to follow
`hashes`     | `u8[hash_count*32]` | hashes, concatenated together

`msg_type` MUST be set to `0`.

A responder MUST send a Hash Response message with `hash_count = 0` to indicate
that they do not intend to return any further hashes for the given `req_id` and

> they have concluded the request on their side.

Reviewer: This makes responses that consist of zero hashes indistinguishable from there-might-be-data-but-I-wont-deliver-it.

Reviewer 2: I think that is true more generally -- the recipient can't distinguish the "i don't want to send you more data" from the "i don't have any more data to send you" case.

Author: @AljoschaMeyer Is there a case where knowing the difference would be helpful?

Reviewer: Fair =D I can't immediately come up with one.

they have concluded the request on their side.

Clients SHOULD hash an entire post to check whether it is post that it was
expecting (i.e. had sent out a Post Request for). However, misbehaving peers
may end up providing posts that are still coincidentally useful to the client,
so clients MAY elect to keep certain posts.

Each post MUST contain the complete and valid body of a known post type
(Section 6.2).

##### 6.3.3.3 Channel List Response

Respond with a list of names of known channels.

field          | type                | desc
---------------|---------------------|-------------------------------------
`channel0_len` | `varint`            | length in bytes of the first channel name, in bytes
`channel0`     | `u8[channel_len]`   | the first channel name (UTF-8)
`...`          |                     |
`channelN_len` | `varint`            | length in bytes of the Nth channel name, in bytes
`channelN`     | `u8[channel_len]`   | the Nth channel name (UTF-8)

`msg_type` MUST be set to `7`.

A recipient reads the zero or more (`channel_len`,`channel`) pairs until
`channel_len = 0`.

In order for pagination to work properly, clients MUST use a stable sort

> method for the names of channels.

Reviewer: See comments on the earlier occurence of pagination.
